---
layout: default
title: Contributor License Agreement - OpenXC
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>OpenXC Contributor License Agreement</h1>
</div>

Before we can accept a contribution to one of OpenXC's open source projects, we
ask that all developers sign a [Contributor License
Agreement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contributor_License_Agreement) (CLA).

The CLA makes everyone's rights clear. It states:

* You grant copyright license for your contributions to Ford Motor Company
* You grant patent license for your contributions to Ford
* Your contribution is entirely voluntary
* Your work is your original creation
* You are not required to provide support for your contributions

You should read and understand the entire CLA before signing it. This
description of it is not legally binding.

The CLA is beneficial to our contributors and users because:

* It ensures that we will always be able to release our projects, free from any
    individual contributor revoking our rights to distribute their
    contribution.
* This also means that, if you fork a Ford project, or utilize it in a
    commercial product, you know that you are clear of patent and copyright
    issues.
* It makes clear what is required of our contributors.

**The most important thing about the CLA is that it doesn't give Ford any special
rights - it just makes things more explicit.**

<script type='text/javascript' language='JavaScript' src='https://secure.echosign.com/public/widget?f=52MC8WHX444N7F'></script>

By submitting your this form, you agree to voluntarily give consent to have your
personal information collected, processed, and stored by Ford Motor Company and
its vendors in databases located in the U.S.A., and to global transfers of this
information within Ford's vendors and Ford and its affiliates.
