---
layout: default
permalink: /developers/android/host.html
---

Android Host
=============

OpenXC applications are standard Android applications that use the OpenXC
library in conjunction with a vehicle interface module connected to a USB port.

There are only a few requirements for the Android hardware, or what we call the
host device:

* It must support **Android 3.1** or greater (i.e. API level 12 or greater)
* It must have support **USB host mode** and provide a way to plug in a USB
  device - this does *not* mean the standard micro-USB port you use for
  debugging or copying files to the SD card. Some tablets offer a full-size
  USB port and others offer a dongle that exposes one.

An Android device that is known to work well with OpenXC is the [Toshiba
Thrive][thrive] - it's a relatively inexpensive Android tablet running 3.2
Honeycomb and includes a full-size USB port. A device with 3G connectivity can
make building web-enabled applications easier, but a 3G -> WiFi microcell can
get aroudn this limitation quite easily (see the [FAQ](/developers/faq.html) for
more details).

## Motivation

The requires for the host device are quite flexible, but it's important that
OpenXC rally around a single platform to maximize compatibility and momentum.
Ideally, the platform should be accessible to a wide range of programmers from
novice to expert, and it should use a popular programming language. The barriers
to understanding and developing for vehicles are high enough (e.g. learning
about CAN and about UI appropriate at 70mph) that learning a new niche
programming langauge should be avoided.

Android is a massively popular application development environment. Since the
vehicle interface is only a small part of any OpenXC application, this means
that more general questions can be directed to the existing community of Android
developers.

The open hardware part of OpenXC is also supported by Android. All Android
devices running version 3.1 or later have support for [USB devices][], and many
tablets include a full-size USB port. Combined with the affordability and
increasing popularity of Android-based tablets, the liklihood that an interested
developer already has or can acquire one is high.

Android, an open source project, lends itself well to custom hardware that would
likely be used if OpenXC hosts are mass produced. Some of the most expensive
components of a tablet (battery, LCD screen, GPS receiver, etc.) can be left out
to hit an ever lower price point.

[thrive]: http://us.toshiba.com/tablets/thrive/10-inch/
[USB devices]: http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/usb/index.html
