openxcplatform.com
================

This project contains the contents of openxcplatform.com as a [jekyll][]-powered
site.

[jekyll]: http://jekyllrb.com/

## Local development

If you do not have ruby and RubyGems installed (you already do on OS X), see
below.

Assuming you have Ruby and RubyGems installed:

    $ gem install rdiscount jekyll

Then, assuming you have Python's pip installed:

    $ pip install pygments

Then run the local development server:

    $ cd openxc.github.com
    $ jekyll serve -w

and point your browser to http://localhost:4000.

Jekyll uses the templates in the repository to generate a static html version of
the site. The static version is always dumped in the `_site` subdirectory in the
repository - this is *not* committed, since it's automatically generated. The
`-w` flag turns on auto-recompilation, so anytime you change a file it will
regenerate whatever files have changed, so you just need to refresh the browser
to see your latest updates.

### Installing Ruby and RubyGems

**Cygwin in Windows**

Install the `ruby`, `make`, `gcc`, `libiconv` and `zlib` packages in
Cygwin using the `setup.exe`
you downloaded earlier. Download the RubyGems TGZ package from
http://rubygems.org/pages/download and put it in `C:\cygwin\home\<your
username>`. Fire up Cygwin and run this:

    $ tar -xzf rubygems*.tgz
    $ cd rubygems*
    $ ruby setup.rb

Jekyll depends on posix-spawn v0.3.6, but that has a problem with compiling in
Cygwin. The latest development version works, though, so install that gem from
source before continuing:

    $ git clone https://github.com/rtomayko/posix-spawn.git
    $ cd posix-spawn
    $ gem build posix-spawn.gemspec
    $ gem install posix-spawn-0.3.6.gem

If you didn't get any errors, return to the top of this section and install
jekyll.

## Going Live

The site is hosted on GitHub pages, so deploying is as simple as commiting your
changes and pushing to GitHub. It gets regenerated within a minute or two, and
it's live. This of course means don't push anything in the master branch that
isn't 100% done!

## Organization

`_layouts/default.html` contains the main layout for the site. There's only 1
layout for now, although there could others in the future.

There's lots you can do with the templates (they're using the Liquid template
engine) - see the Jekyll docs: https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki.

## License

Except as otherwise noted, the content of the website is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
