---
layout: developer
title: Preparing your Workstation - OpenXC
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Preparing your Workstation</h1>
</div>

To start developing with OpenXC, you'll first need to install a few software packages in order to both flash
firmware to your Vehicle Interface, as well as test the interface to make sure it's working.
This will require Cygwin (on Windows) or Homebrew (on Mac). Linux users will be able to pull
in the required packages right off the command line.

<h2>Windows</h2>
<ol>
    <li>Download the <strong>32-bit</strong> setup file for <a href=http://www.cygwin.com>Cygwin</a>.</li>
    <li>Run the Cygwin installer. The Cygwin installer lets you specify additional packages you'd like to include with your 
        Cygwin installation. Make sure to include all of the following packages:
        <ul>
            <li>git</li>
            <li>curl</li>
            <li>libsas12</li>
            <li>ca-certificates</li>
            <li>patchutils</li>
            <li>python</li>
            <li>python-setuptools</li>
            <li>libusb-win32</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li>Install the OpenXC Python library via Cygwin using the following command: 
    {% highlight bash %}sudo easy_install -U openxc{% endhighlight %}
    See <a href=http://python.openxcplatform.com/en/latest/#installation>
    the Python documentation</a> for more information.</li>
    <li>Once you've obtained a Vehicle Interface, you'll need to install the 
    <a href=https://github.com/openxc/vi-firmware/tree/master/conf/windows-driver>
    Vehicle Interface USB Driver</a>. 
</ol>

<h2>Mac OS X</h2>
<ol>
    <li>Open a terminal window, then install the Python OpenXC library using easy_install: 
    {% highlight bash %}sudo easy_install -U openxc{% endhighlight %}
    See <a href=http://python.openxcplatform.com/en/latest/#installation>
    the Python documentation</a> for more information.</li>
    <li>Install <a href="mxcl.github.com/homebrew/">Homebrew</a> (A package manager for OS X) using the following command: 
        {% highlight bash %}ruby -e "$(curl -fsSkL raw.github.com/mxcl/homebrew/go)"{% endhighlight %}</li>
    <li>Using Homebrew, install the USB Backend used to connect a Vehicle Interface to your computer via USB. You can do this
    with the following command: 
    {% highlight bash %}brew install libusb{% endhighlight %}</li>
    <li>Again using Homebrew, install git if you don't already have it installed. 
    {% highlight bash %}brew install git{% endhighlight %}</li>
</ol>

<h2>Ubuntu</h2>
<ol>
    <li>Install the Python OpenXC library using pip: 
    {% highlight bash %}pip install -U openxc{% endhighlight %}</li>
    <li>Install libusb from the main repository: 
    {% highlight bash %}sudo apt-get install libusb-1.0-0{% endhighlight %}</li>
</ol>
<h2>Arch Linux</h2>
<ol>
    <li>Install the Python OpenXC library using pip: 
    {% highlight bash %}pip install -U openxc{% endhighlight %}</li>
    <li>Install libusb via pacman: 
    {% highlight bash %}sudo pacman -S libusbx{% endhighlight %}</li>
</ol>  
