---
layout: project
title: Stanford Senior Design Project - OpenXC
---

[srmLink]: /projects/stanford-me113-spring-2013/shape-retaining-mount.html
[suicLink]: /projects/stanford-me113-spring-2013/smartphone-user-interface-cloning.html
[3dpmLink]: /projects/stanford-me113-spring-2013/3d-printed-tablet-mount.html

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Stanford Senior Design Project</h1>
</div>

**GitHub Repository:**
[here](https://github.com/embirico/stanford-me113-spring-2013)

The following work was undertaken (enjoyed) as a senior capstone design project
of four Stanford Mechanical Engineering Candidates during Spring 2013.

* [Forrest Berg](http://www.linkedin.com/pub/forrest-berg/54/431/431)
* [Alexander Embiricos](http://www.embiri.co/)
* [Jacob Gowan](http://www.jacobgowan.com/)
* [Emily Henriksson](http://emilyhenriksson.weebly.com/)

Dave Evans acted as the primary liason from the Ford Silicon Valley Laboratory.

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Problem Statement</h2>
</div>

While the car is built to last for at least 10 years and over 100,000 miles, consumer
electronics often have a life cycle of around 12-18 months. As a result, a car may feel old
for most of its lifespan. Together with Ford SVL we set out to design a solution that would
make car electronics more modular so as to better keep up with and leverage
rapidly changing technology.

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Key Observation</h2>
</div>

During our needfinding process, we found that Silicon Valley interviewees tend to:

* Own a smartphone which is newer than 3 years old.
* Use their smartphone instead of their car's infotainment system for
  features such as music. Smartphones were used even for features such as
  navigation, for which the car has a specifically designed interface.
* Use their smartphone without proper mounting, and without considering
  driver distraction issues.

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Proposed Solutions</h2>
</div>

We decided on two main solutions which approach the problem of **clean, modular and safe
smart-device integration** from different perspectives. These solutions are
implemented in three separate projects:

* **[Shape Retaining Mount (SRM)][srmLink]**

  To enable the frequent swapping of a variety of devices with unpredictable shapes,
  we designed and built a Shape Retaining Mount,
  a soft surface which can harden around
  an object to secure it. This mount could also be used to hold non-smart devices, or
  even instrument panels for those not inclined towards touchscreen interfaces.

* **[Smartphone User Interface Cloning (UIC)][suicLink]**

  To go beyond simply fixturing a device in a predetermined position, and in order to be
  truly convenient and safe, we created a hybrid hardware/software solution:
  Smartphone User Interface Cloning
  is the idea that many safety and practical benefits can be gained from encouraging
  a driver to interact with his phone *via* a permanent touch-screen on the console.
  This concept is significantly different from [MirrorLink](http://www.mirrorlink.com/),
  so please [read more][suicLink] to find out how.

* **[3D Printed Tablet Mount][3dpmLink]**

  To demonstrate our UIC concept, we created a semi-permanent,
  3D Printed Tablet Mountfor a SYNC 1.5 Ford Mustang
  that can be used to fixture a variety of devices by printing different
  adaptor parts.
  Although there's nothing particularly unusual about the project, it can provide a solid
  reference for any hobbyists seeking to create similar projects.

<div class="page-header">
  <h2>Conclusion and Evaluation</h2>
</div>

We believe to have given two possible answers to the question of in-car electronics
modularity:

On a physical level, our shape-retaining mount concept can be refined to allow
the design of swappable interfaces by users or by the manufacturer.
This was our "We don't think other people will think of this" idea. :)
One area that would need to be investigated is safety,
especially if the user is the person responsible for placing the device in the
mount.

At a higher level, we believe that manufacturers must both streamline the
conflict/overlap between smart devices and infotainment, as well as provide a
better way for users to interact with their devices in the car.
Our idea of simple display mirroring is the cleanest way of providing such an
interface that can both evolve with technology and provide some control
over driver distraction. However, it provides no garuantee that content will
comply with official driver distraction standards and as such, may be
unrealistic from an OEM perspective.
Nonetheless, manufacturers cannot afford to duplicate all work done in the
smart-device space. It may be that trusting respected institutions like Apple
or Google to lead here can provide a middle ground between user experience and
safety.
