---
layout: hardware
title: Android Host Device - OpenXC
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Android Host Device</h1>
</div>

OpenXC applications on Android are merely Android applications that use the
OpenXC Android library to receive and parse data from a <a href="">vehicle
interface</a>. Android is one of a few [options for writing
applications](/host-devices/index.html) using OpenXC.


<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Connecting your Device to the Vehicle Interface</h2>
</div>


<div class="page-header">
    <h3>Bluetooth</h3>
</div>
Bluetooth support is working well now, and it has the lowest hardware
requirements so it is the recommended interface.

The OpenXC Enabler application handles the actual communication to the
Vehicle Interface. You don't need to add any extra code to your application
to communicate via Bluetooth to it.

When using a Bluetooth-equipped vehicle interface, the Android host
device must run **Android 2.2** or greater (i.e. API level 8).

<div class="page-header">
    <h3>USB OTG Cable</h3>
</div>
Alternatively, if you wish to hard-wire to the vehicle interface with a USB
connection, the Android host device must:

* Run **Android 3.0** or greater (i.e. API level 12) if you plan to
  use the standard USB vehicle interface.
* Support **USB host mode** or **USB OTG** - Some tablets offer a full-size USB
  port and others are compatible with [USB OTG
  adapters](http://www.monoprice.com/products/product.asp?c_id=108&cp_id=10833&cs_id=1083314&p_id=9724&format=2)
  that attach to the micro-USB port normally used for charging.

<div class="page-header">
    <h4>Android Device Compatibility</h4>
</div>

For a partial list of supported Android devices, see the [supported
devices](https://github.com/openxc/openxcplatform.com/wiki/Android-device-compatibility)
page in the wiki. If you've used another device successfully (or
unsuccessfully), feel free to update the wiki.

[USB devices]: http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/connectivity/usb/index.html
