---
layout: default
title: Android Host Device - OpenXC
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Android Host Device</h1>
</div>

OpenXC applications are standard Android applications that use the OpenXC
library in conjunction with a vehicle interface module connected to a USB port
or via Bluetooth.

The recommended vehicle interface is USB as it is much more robust and
well-tested. When using USB, the host device must:

* Support **Android 3.0** or greater (i.e. API level 12) if you plan to
  use the standard USB vehicle interface.
* Support **USB host mode** and provide a way to plug in a USB device - this
  does *not* mean the standard mini- or micro-USB port you use for debugging or
  copying files to the SD card. Some tablets offer a full-size USB port and
  others offer a dongle that exposes one.

Bluetooth support is currently experimental but has the lowest hardware
requirements. When using a Bluetooth-equipped CAN translator, the Android host
device must:

* Support **Android 2.3** or greater (i.e. API level 10)

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Confirmed Supported Android Devices</h2>
</div>

**Tablets**

* [Toshiba Thrive][thrive] 10.1" - the reference device used by the core OpenXC
  developers. This tablet includes a full-size USB port.
* Google Nexus 7 (using Bluetooth or a USB OTG adapter)

**Phones**

* Samsung [Galaxy Nexus][galaxynexus] (using Bluetooth or a USB OTG adapter,
  although the CAN translator must be powered externally if using USB)

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Known Incompatible Devices</h2>
</div>

* Samsung Galaxy Tab - USB host mode is not fully enabled and is not compatible
  with a USB CAN translator.

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>UI Design</h2>
</div>

User interface design for automotive environments is increasingly attracting
attention, particularly due to concerns with [driver
distraction](http://www.distraction.gov/). While building your OpenXC
application, keep in mind the U.S. government's recently released [guidelines
(PDF)](http://www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/rulemaking/pdf/Distraction_NPFG-02162012.pdf)
for application design.

Driver distraction aside, the most useful and interesting applications tend to
be those without much driver interaction. The more you can automate or let the
user deal with outside of their vehicle, the better the experience will likely
be.

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Motivation</h2>
</div>

The requirements for the host device are quite flexible, but it's important that
OpenXC rally around a single platform to maximize compatibility and momentum.
Ideally, the platform should be accessible to a wide range of programmers from
novice to expert, and it should use a popular programming language. The barriers
to understanding and developing for vehicles are high enough (e.g. learning
about CAN and about UI appropriate at 70mph) that learning a new niche
programming language should be avoided. The platform should also use
widely-available hardware to minimize the burden that individual developers must
bear to start creating applications.

Android is a massively popular application development environment. Since the
vehicle interface is only a small part of any OpenXC application, this means
that more general questions can be directed to the existing community of Android
developers.

The open hardware part of OpenXC is also supported by Android. All Android
devices running version 3.1 or later have support for [USB devices][], and many
tablets include a full-size USB port. OpenXC hardware modules like sensors and
in-vehicle UI can use USB to connect to applications. Combined with the
affordability and increasing popularity of Android-based tablets, the likelihood
that an interested developer already has or can acquire one is high.

Android, an open source project, lends itself well to custom hardware that would
likely be used if OpenXC hosts are mass produced. Some of the most expensive
components of a tablet (battery, LCD screen, GPS receiver, etc.) can be left out
to hit an ever lower price point.

[thrive]: http://us.toshiba.com/tablets/thrive/10-inch/
[galaxynexus]: http://www.google.com/nexus
[USB devices]: http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/usb/index.html
