`openxc-android` ---
layout: developer
title: Library Setup - OpenXC
redirect_from:
    - /getting-started/library-installation.html
    - /developers/android/library-installation.html
---
<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Android Library Installation</h1>
</div>

The OpenXC functionality is exposed via a Java library that includes some
Android services your application can use. The library is available on GitHub in
the [openxc-android][] repository and the latest stable version is also in the`openxc-android` 
JCenter repository (which can be used in any Android Studio project just
by adding a line to your `build.gradle`).

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Installation</h2>
</div>

<div class="page-header">
    <h3 id="app-developer"><a href="#app-developer">For App Developers</a></h3>
openxc\openxc-android --> library\build.gradle.local</div>

Follow Google's excellent instructions to
[download and install Android Studio](http://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html).

Add the `openxc` library to your project's dependencies in the `app/build.gradle`
file:

    dependencies {
        compile 'com.openxcplatform:library:7.0.6'
    }

That's it! You can now proceed to the next steps to start using the library in
your project.

<div class="page-header">
    <h3 id="contributor"><a href="#contributor">For Contributors</a></h3>
</div>

Clone the [openxc-android][] repository using Git. If you don't already have Git
installed, GitHub has a [good
reference](https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git) for all platforms.

After cloning the `openxc-android` library, open the project in Android Studio.
You should be able to point it at the `openxc-android` directory to open an
existing project. The project includes 2 modules: the library and the Enabler
app.

Note: If for some reason you are unable to use the remote `openxc-android` library, you can use a local copy. This requires replacing three files in the starter app, and one file in the imported library. All of the required files are included in each of the respective repositories with a .local extension. Below is a list of the files and locations:

```
openxc\openxc-starter --> settings.gradle.local
openxc\openxc-starter --> build.gradle.local
openxc\openxc-starter --> app\build.gradle.local
openxc\openxc-android --> library\build.gradle.local
```

Replace the standard versions of the files with the .local files. For example, in the OpenXC Starter app, replace the app\build.gralde file with the app\build.gradle.local file. Restart your IDE, run the Gradle build process, and your starter app should now be using a local copy of the `openxc-android` library.

<div class="page-header">
<h2>Next Steps</h2>
</div>

Once you have the library set up, you can start writing your first OpenXC
app using the [App Tutorial](/android/tutorial.html). If you are having trouble, check out the
[troubleshooting](/android/troubleshooting.html) steps.

[APK]: https://github.com/openxc/openxc-android/releases
[openxc-android]: https://github.com/openxc/openxc-android
