---
layout: hardware
title: Application Host Devices - OpenXC
redirect_from:
    - /host-devices/
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Application Host Devices</h1>
</div>

Once you have a vehicle interface sending out OpenXC-formatted data, you need a
"host device" where you will write applications. The only requirement of a host
device is that it can receive and parse OpenXC vehicle data via USB, Bluetooth
or a network interface. There are a number of different development choices, and
the list continues to grow.

## Android

For instructions on getting started with Android development and a full list of
tested Android devices, see the <a href="/android/index.html">Android host
device</a> page.

Why Android? It's important that OpenXC rally around a single platform to
maximize compatibility and momentum. We looked for a platform that is accessible
programmers with a wide range of skills and experience, and uses a popular
programming language. The barriers to understanding and developing for vehicles
are high enough (e.g. learning about CAN and about UI appropriate at 70mph) that
learning a new niche programming language would be a huge barrier to entry.
Android also benefits from a plethora of available hardware at a range of prices
and capabilities, furthering accessibility.

Finally, Android is a massively popular application development environment.
Since the OpenXC library is only a small part of any OpenXC application, more
general questions can be directed to the existing community of Android
developers.

## Python

The <a target="_blank" href="http://python.openxcplatform.com">OpenXC Python library</a>
provides access to vehicle data from a VI in a more familiar desktop programming
environment. The library also includes a number of command line tools that are
very handy for testing custom firmware.

The primary platform for OpenXC applications is Android, but for prototyping and
testing, it is often preferable to use a low-overhead environment like Python
when developing.

## iOS

There are a few reasons why iOS is not supported right now for - check out this
[detailed discussion in the Google
Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/openxc/mUEiJDZ0oXg){:target="_blank"} to see if you
can help.
