---
layout: developer
title: Library Setup - OpenXC
redirect_from:
    - /getting-started/library-installation.html
    - /developers/iOS/library-installation.html
---
<div class="page-header">
    <h1>iOS Framework Installation</h1>
</div>

The OpenXC functionality is exposed via a Swift library that includes some
iOS services your application can use. The library is available on GitHub in
the [openxc-ios-library][] repository

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Installation</h2>
</div>

1. Follow Apple's excellent instructions to
[download and install XCode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/).
2. Clone the [openxc-ios-library][] repository using Git ,In this you will get openxc-demo app and framework both. If you don't already have Git
installed, GitHub has a [good
reference](https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git) for all platforms.If you want to use openxc-framework in your existing project then follow below steps.
3. Install cocoapod if you don't already have installed <code>sudo gem install cocoapods</code>. 
4. In your existing project/New project add a pod file to it if not with the command <code>pod init</code>.For cocoapod reference [cocoapod](https://cocoapods.org/)
5. Open the pod file, add "pod openxcframework" to the pod file, and save.
6. Run the command <code>pod install</code> in terminal.
7. Open the projectName.xcworkspace in XCode. You should be able to point it at the `openxc-ios-framework` directory to open an
existing project. 

That's it! You can now proceed to the next steps to start using the framework in
your project.

<div class="page-header">
<h2>Next Steps</h2>
</div>

Once you have the framework set up, you can start writing your first OpenXC
app using the [App Tutorial](/iOS/tutorial.html). If you are having trouble, check out the
[troubleshooting](/iOS/troubleshooting.html) steps.

[openxc-ios-library]: https://github.com/openxc/openxc-ios-library
