---
layout: developer
title: Testing - OpenXC
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Testing</h1>
</div>

<div class="alert alert-danger">
Please <strong>do not</strong> try to test your application while in
motion! Testing OpenXC apps while driving is absolutely a two person job.
</div>

<div class="page-header">
    <h2>Pre-recorded Vehicle Data</h2>
</div>

Your iOS device likely doesn't have any vehicle data flowing through it yet.
The next step is to use a pre-recorded vehicle trace file to simulate a real
vehicle interface on your desk. The library ships with a method for playing 
back previously recorded vehicle measurement trace files for testing. 
The [Measurement][] objects received by your application are identical to 
those received from a live vehicle.

The trace file format is simply a plain text file of OpenXC JSON messages with
an additional timestamp field, separated by newlines:

    {"timestamp": 1351176963.426318, "name": "door_status", "value": "passenger", "event": true}
    {"timestamp": 1351176963.438087, "name": "fine_odometer_since_restart", "value": 0.0}
    {"timestamp": 1351176963.438211, "name": "brake_pedal_status", "value": false}
    {"timestamp": 1351176963.438318, "name": "transmission_gear_position", "value": "second"}

Install the [Demo App][demoapp] app if you haven't already. That application
helps control the source of vehicle data, e.g. a vehicle interface or a trace
file.

Download the [driving trace][] and copy it to your iOS
device using iTunes. 

Steps:

* Connect the iOS device to your laptop/desktop.
* Open iTunes
* Drag and drop the trace file and Sync


Finally, the last steps:

1. Run the `OpenXC Demo app` on the device
1. In the Demo app, Go to `Settings -> Data Sources` and change the vehicle
    interface to a Pre-recorded Trace File.
1. At the bottom of the screen under `Trace File Playback`, select a trace file
    for playback. 
1. Return to the front view of the Demo app - the message count should be
   increasing, indicating the trace is playing.


[gg]: http://groups.google.com/group/openxc
[demoapp]: /iOS/getting-started.html#demoapp
[vehicle interface]: /vehicle-interface/hardware.html
[Measurement]: http://android.openxcplatform.com/reference/com/openxc/measurements/Measurement.html
[VehicleManager]: http://android.openxcplatform.com/reference/com/openxc/VehicleManager.html
[driving trace]: https://s3.amazonaws.com/openxcplatform.com/driving.json
