---
layout: developer
title: Advanced Firmware Development - OpenXC
---

<div class="page-header">
    <h1>Advanced Firmware Development</h1>
</div>

So you've seen the [available binary firmware](/vehicle-interface/firmware.html)
and you're not satisfied. Your car's automaker doesn't support OpenXC yet, or
want some data that's not made available - you really need to know the engine
oil pressure, and it's not in any binary firmware. Maybe you work for a car
company or an aftermarket supplier and you want to support some completely
custom application, or you want to write some messages back to the bus.

You're in luck - OpenXC can support all of these use cases. The core of the
vehicle data translation resides in the firmware that runs on the vehicle
interface. Besides knowing how to connect to the CAN bus and how to send data
out over USB and Bluetooth, the firmware is also programmed with
vehicle-specific knowledge that allows it to pick out the right messages from
the car and translate the data into something you can use in your application.

The core of the firmware is open source - not the vehicle-specific parts, but
the framework that makes it easy to do the translation once you understand the
vehicle. When an automaker releases a binary firmware for an OpenXC VI, they're
probably taking the open source firmware, mixing in their proprietary vehicle
knowledge, and send you the resulting compiled binary.

The OpenXC VI firmware is also increasingly capable of reading and writing raw
CAN bus traffic, making it a low cost and extremely flexible version of some of
the more expensive industry tools - and one that works on platforms besides
Windows, too!

The firmware is written in C++, but for most common reading and writing use
cases, you don't need to write any new code. The CAN signals to translate are
configured with JSON files - simple, human readable files you can edit in any
text editor.

## Getting Started

The best place to start is with the [VI
Concepts](/vehicle-interface/concepts.html) page, to make sure you understand
all of the concepts and terms required to build the VI firmware from source. The
auto industry tends to be fairly jargon-laden, so even if you're an expert it's
good to make sure we have the same understanding or the definitions.

Once you've read that (or if you're feeling confident...) jump into the [custom
CAN signal example](/firmware/custom-data-example.html) for a brief introduction
to compiling the firmware to translate a new piece of data from the car.
